RFC Blogpost for indented syntax (#1260)
sass/sass-site: source/blog/044-rfc-indented-syntax.md

---
title: "Request for Comments: Indented Syntax Improvements"
author: James Stuckey Weber
date: 2024-11-27 15:30:00 -8
---

For users of the indented syntax (`.sass`), there has been a long standing
request for the ability to have line breaks that don't end a statement. Certain
CSS syntaxes like `grid-template` and `@font-face` `src` declarations are long,
and line breaks can greatly increase the readability of the styles. 

There have been many suggestions, several attempts, and numerous workarounds to
address this pain point. We are proposing several new syntax options in the
indented syntax that add considerable flexibility and look to address this as
part of the language.

## The new syntax

Instead of adding syntax that is completely new to Sass, we propose to borrow
syntax from the SCSS format and make it available in the indented syntax. This
reduces the learning curve, code complexity, and likelihood of future conflicts
with new CSS features.

> A common way of using this syntax will be wrapping lists with linebreaks in

Reviewer: Nit: `line break` instead of `linebreak` (also other instances below)

```suggestion
A common way of using this syntax will be wrapping lists with line breaks in
```

parentheses. This allows for a grid-template declaration on multiple lines.

```sass
.grid
  display: grid
  grid-template: (
    "header" min-content
    "main" 1fr
  )
}
```

These parentheses will not be included in the output.

```css
.grid {
  display: grid;
  grid-template: "header" min-content "main" 1fr;
}
```

Powering this change is the underlying rule that linebreaks only end statements
in places where statements can end. Anywhere where a statement can't end, a
linebreak is treated as whitespace. This means that if the parser can't tell
whether or not a linebreak is intended to end a statement, it will end the

> statement.

Reviewer: Would it be helpful to also include a code example showing the "parser can't tell" path?

Author: Added in https://github.com/sass/sass-site/pull/1260/commits/2002663d4101d067f1190c39d0daa86ced8ab622

This example demonstrates several places where line breaks will be possible.

```sass
@each $item in ¹
    1 2 3
  .item-#{ ²
    $item
  }
    content: $item * ³
        10
```

1. A statement can't end after the word "in" in an `@each` statement.
2. A statement can't end inside the curly braces in an interpolation.

> 3. A statement can't end after a multiplication operator.

Reviewer: I think these references might be easier to parse if they used line numbers instead of superscript. Or I'm not sure if there's a better way to make it clear that they're not part of the code example?

Author: Line numbers made it harder to follow, I think.

I'll push a version with inline comments-
<img width="829" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2a291082-2fa2-4e2d-83ae-d0377f852943">

Here's the original-
<img width="589" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/50444dd3-8807-4cd2-99a5-02ca1c4da045">

## SCSS-in-Sass

We are also proposing a new block-level opt-in to the SCSS format. One 
workaround for not having multiline statements has been to author some styles in
separate SCSS files, and we are proposing an inline alternative.

To opt in to the SCSS format for a block, you simply need
to wrap the block inside of curly braces. 

```sass
a
  color: blue

// Opt in to SCSS format for this rule
p {
  padding: 
    var(--top-padding, 1em)
    var(--right-padding, 2em)
    var(--bottom-padding, 1em)
    var(--left-padding, 1.5em);
  color: red;
}

// Back to indented syntax
strong
  font:
    weight: bold
```

## Semicolons are also allowed

> We are also proposing that semicolons can optionally be added at the end of

Reviewer: Maybe find another phrase rather than repeating "We are also proposing...". Maybe "Another proposed change would allow..." or something?

There have been many suggestions, several attempts, and numerous workarounds to
address this pain point. We are proposing several new syntax options in the
indented syntax that add considerable flexibility and look to address this as
part of the language.

## The new syntax

Instead of adding syntax that is completely new to Sass, we propose to borrow
syntax from the SCSS format and make it available in the indented syntax. This
reduces the learning curve, code complexity, and likelihood of future conflicts
with new CSS features.

A common way of using this syntax will be wrapping lists with line breaks in
parentheses. This allows for a grid-template declaration on multiple lines.

```sass
.grid
  display: grid
  grid-template: (
    "header" min-content
    "main" 1fr
  )
}
```

These parentheses will not be included in the output.

```css
.grid {
  display: grid;
  grid-template: "header" min-content "main" 1fr;
}
```

Powering this change is the underlying rule that linebreaks only end statements
in places where statements can end. Anywhere where a statement can't end, a
linebreak is treated as whitespace. This means that if the parser can't tell

> whether or not a linebreak is intended to end a statement, it will end the

Reviewer 2: I think asking the user to understand whether the parser can or can't tell something may be a bit confusing. Possibly better to say "if a linebreak _could_ end a statement, it _will_ end the statement".

statement.

> This example demonstrates several places where line breaks will be possible.

Reviewer 2: Even line breaks that end statements are "possible". Maybe better to say "will not end statements".

```sass
@each $item in /* A statement can't end after the word "in" in an `@each` statement. */
    1, 2, 3
  .item-#{ 
    $item /* A statement can't end inside the curly braces in an interpolation. */
  }
    content: $item * /* A statement can't end after a multiplication operator. */
        10
```

As a counter example, here are some places in the same stylesheet where

> linebreaks could end statements, so linebreaks will cause compilation errors.

Reviewer 2: I think it's worth explaining a little more explicitly that these will cause compilation errors because the *next line* can't be parsed as a valid statement.

     2, 3
  .item-#{ $item }
    content: $item /* A statement can end after a value, and does not look ahead for operators. */
      * 10
```

## SCSS-in-Sass

We are also proposing a new block-level opt-in to the SCSS format. One 
workaround for not having multiline statements has been to author some styles in
separate SCSS files, and this provides an inline alternative.

To opt in to the SCSS format for a block, you simply need
to wrap the block inside of curly braces. 

```sass
a
  color: blue

// Opt in to SCSS format for this rule
p {
  padding: 
    var(--top-padding, 1em)
    var(--right-padding, 2em)
    var(--bottom-padding, 1em)
    var(--left-padding, 1.5em);
  color: red;
}

// Back to indented syntax
strong
  font:
    weight: bold
```

## Semicolons are also allowed

Another proposed change would allow semicolons to optionally be added at the end
of statements in the indented syntax. Indentation rules still apply, so you
won't be able to separate multiple statements on the same line, even with a
semicolon (unless you're in a [SCSS-in-Sass](#scss-in-sass) block).

## No breaking changes

These changes are opt-in, so authors who don't want to use the new syntax do not

> have to make any changes or learn new syntax. No changes need to be made to

Reviewer 2: It's a bit disingenuous to say that users who don't use this won't have to learn it; it's still fairly likely they'll encounter other people's stylesheets that do use it.

existing stylesheets written in the Indented Syntax.

## Next steps

This is still in the proposal phase, and we are open to feedback. Review the
proposal [on
Github](https://github.com/sass/sass/blob/main/proposal/indented-syntax-improvements.md),

> and [open an issue](https://github.com/sass/sass/issues/new) with any thoughts

Reviewer 2: Nit: use reference links
